# Intro to Resources

This tutorial builds on [01_hello_world](../01_hello_world/README.md) by adding our first "real" simulation element, resources.

## Mutable Resources

Mutable resources hold the "state" of the simulation, defining the state of the world and the system you are modeling.

In this example, let's start with an empty simulator like so:
```kotlin
    val start = Instant.parse("2030-01-01T00:00:00Z")
    val end = start + 1.days
    val results = MutableSimulationResults(start, end)
    val simulator = Simulator(
        reportHandler = results.reportHandler(),
        startTime = start,
    ) {
        // ...
    }
```

Now, let's construct one of the simplest resources available, an integer counter, in the initialization block:
```kotlin
val counter: MutabledIntResource = discreteResource("counter", 0)
```

And finally, let's run this tutorial using the following command from the repository root:
```bash
./gradlew :tutorials:01_modeling:02_intro_to_resources:run
```

When we do, we'll get output like this:
```
Building simulator...
Running simulator...
Reading results...
--- SimulationResults ---
Start: 2030-01-01T00:00:00Z
End:   2030-01-02T00:00:00Z
Resources:
  stdout
  stderr
```

Not particularly interesting. Even though we've created `counter`, we didn't ask the simulator to report on it.
This is intentional, as we sometimes want to create a resource to keep track of something within the simulation,
without reporting every value it has to the output.
To get this resource into the output, we need to register it.
We'll modify the line building `counter` to read:
```kotlin
val counter: MutableIntResource = discreteResource("counter", 0).registered()
```

Now when we re-run, we'll get something like this:
```
Building simulator...
Running simulator...
Reading results...
--- SimulationResults ---
Start: 2030-01-01T00:00:00Z
End:   2030-01-02T00:00:00Z
Resources:
  stdout
  stderr
  counter
    2030-01-01T00:00:00Z -> 0
```

Now we can see that `counter` gets its own section, and we can see the default value we gave it being reported at simulation start.
`stdout`, `stderr`, and `counter` in this view are all output channels.
The output from a simulation is divided into multiple channels, where each channel is a time-ordered stream of output reports.
Most channels are created by registering a resource, but we can also directly create a channel.
We'll cover why you might create a channel directly in another tutorial.

## Derived Resources

Some resource are derived, rather than mutable.
Instead of holding a piece of state, they're a function of other resources.

For example, we can add a resource called `counterIsLarge` that is true when `counter` is greater than 5:
```kotlin
val counterIsLarge: BooleanResource = counter greaterThan 5
```

Here, the utility function `greaterThan` is handling the derivation for us.
There are libraries of similar utility functions, found in classes named `<resource type>Operations`.
For example, `DiscreteResourceOperations` contains `greaterThan`, because `greaterThan` is defined for all `DiscreteResource<T>`, provided `T` implements `Comparable<T>`.
If those libraries aren't enough, we'll cover how to write custom derived resources in another tutorial.

Like before, if we run the simulator like this, `counterIsLarge` won't be in our output. For that, we need to register it.
```kotlin
val counterIsLarge: BooleanResource = (counter greaterThan 5).registered()
```

When we run again, we'll see output a bit like this:
```
--- SimulationResults ---
Start: 2030-01-01T00:00:00Z
End:   2030-01-02T00:00:00Z
Resources:
  stdout
  stderr
  counter
    2030-01-01T00:00:00Z -> 0
  (counter) > (5)
    2030-01-01T00:00:00Z -> false
```

We can see that `counterIsLarge` was registered, but its name is "(counter) > (5)".
This is the name generated by `greaterThan` automatically, mostly for debugging purposes.
To give it a more meaningful name, we call the `.named` function:
```kotlin
val counterIsLarge: BooleanResource = (counter greaterThan 5).named { "counterIsLarge" }.registered()
```

Running again, we'll see output like this:
```
--- SimulationResults ---
Start: 2030-01-01T00:00:00Z
End:   2030-01-02T00:00:00Z
Resources:
  stdout
  stderr
  counter
    2030-01-01T00:00:00Z -> 0
  counterIsLarge
    2030-01-01T00:00:00Z -> false
```

Correct, but not particularly interesting yet.
Now, we want to make things happen, and for that we'll need [tasks](../03_intro_to_tasks/README.md).

You can find the full code for this tutorial in [IntroResources.kt](./src/main/kotlin/pyre_tutorials/IntroResources.kt).
